README.md, before:

# Park-EZ — Campus Parking Spot Availability App

**Park-EZ** is a lightweight web application that shows live campus parking availability for students, professors, and staff.  
It was built by **Scrum & Coke** as part of a university project to make finding parking faster and less stressful.

This version is a fully functional **React + Vite** demo using mock data (no backend required).  
The app simulates real-time updates, deck/level navigation, and QR check-ins/out, ready to connect to real sensors or APIs later.

---

## Features

- **View all parking decks** and their free/occupied spots.  
- **Drill down** by deck → level → individual spots.  
- **Spot types:** Standard, EV, ADA.  
- **Realtime simulation** of occupancy changes (mock “live” feed).  
- **QR check-in simulator:** type a spot label to reserve/release.  
- **Local persistence:** uses `localStorage` to keep state after refresh.  
- Modular architecture: UI components + mock API layer.

---

## Tech Stack

| Layer | Tech | Purpose |
|-------|------|----------|
| Frontend | [React 18](https://react.dev/) + [Vite](https://vitejs.dev/) | Fast SPA UI |
| Styling | Plain CSS | Lightweight styling |
| Mock Data | LocalStorage | Stand-in for real DB |
| Simulation | `setInterval()` + state updates | Mimics backend feed |

---

## Installation

### 1. Clone the repo
```bash
git clone https://github.com/Park-EZ/parkez.git
cd parkez
```

### 2. Create or activate your Node environment

If you’re using **Conda (no sudo)**:
```bash
conda create -n parkez nodejs=20 -c conda-forge -y
conda activate parkez
```

Or plain Node:
```bash
# Check if node/npm exist
node -v && npm -v
# If not, install Node LTS (v20+)
```
### 3. Ensure MongoDB is running on machine
```bash
Install MongoDB if not already on machine at https://www.mongodb.com/try/download/community
Ensure that MongoDB Compass is installed and open it
Create a new connection at mongodb://localhost:27017
```

### 4. Install dependencies
```bash
npm install
(also for good measure)
cd server
npm install
cd ..
```

### 5. Copy .env.example as .env
```bash
Copy .env.example into root project directory (/parkez/) as .env
```
---

## 6. Run the app (Development)

Start the Vite dev server:
```bash
npm run dev
```

If you’re running on a **remote Linux server**, make it visible to your network:
```bash
npx vite --host 0.0.0.0 --port 5173
```

Then open:
```
http://YOUR_SERVER_IP:5173/
```

You’ll see the **Park-EZ** dashboard with decks, levels, and spots.

---

## Build for Production

Generate an optimized build:
```bash
npm run build
```

This creates static files in the `dist/` directory.

You can serve them with any static web server, e.g.:
```bash
python -m http.server 8080 --directory dist
```

Then visit:
```
http://YOUR_SERVER_IP:8080/
```

---

## Project Structure

```
parkez/
├─ src/
│  ├─ components/        # Reusable UI pieces
│  │   ├─ Header.jsx
│  │   ├─ DeckList.jsx
│  │   ├─ LevelView.jsx
│  │   └─ SpotGrid.jsx
│  ├─ api.js             # Mock backend logic (CRUD + live simulation)
│  ├─ mockData.js        # Seed data for decks, levels, spots
│  ├─ App.jsx            # Root component
│  ├─ main.jsx           # Vite entry point
│  └─ styles.css         # Base styling
├─ index.html
├─ package.json
├─ vite.config.js
└─ README.md
```

---

## Scripts

| Command | Description |
|----------|--------------|
| `npm run dev` | Start local dev server |
| `npm run build` | Build production bundle |
| `npm run preview` | Preview production build |
| `npm install` | Install dependencies |

---

## Environment & Deployment Notes

- Works entirely client-side (no backend needed).  
- Data is stored in `localStorage`, every browser session is persistent.  
- The `api.js` layer can be swapped out for real API calls to a **Fastify** backend or a REST service.  
- To deploy, simply upload the `/dist` folder to any static host (GitHub Pages, Netlify, S3, etc).

---

## Future Enhancements

-  Replace mock data with real IoT sensor or camera feeds.  
-  Add authentication for staff/student roles.  
-  Integrate real QR code scanning using `getUserMedia` + `jsQR`.  
-  Add backend with **Fastify + MongoDB** for real sessions & analytics.  
-  Show deck-level congestion and estimated time to find parking.
- 
---

## License
This project is open-source for educational use.  
Feel free to fork, adapt, and extend with attribution.

---

Commit message:

Made check-ins/out persistent across different user sessions, insert incorrect status reports to MongoDB for persistency

README.md, after:

# Park-EZ — Campus Parking Spot Availability App

**Park-EZ** is a lightweight web application that shows live campus parking availability for students, professors, and staff.  
It was built by **Scrum & Coke** as part of a university project to make finding parking faster and less stressful.

This version is a fully functional **React + Vite** demo using mock data (no backend required).  
The app simulates real-time updates, deck/level navigation, and QR check-ins/out, ready to connect to real sensors or APIs later.

---

## Features

- **View all parking decks** and their free/occupied spots.  
- **Drill down** by deck → level → individual spots.  
- **Spot types:** Standard, EV, ADA.  
- **Realtime simulation** of occupancy changes (mock “live” feed).  
- **QR check-in simulator:** type a spot label to reserve/release.  
- **Local persistence:** uses `localStorage` to keep state after refresh.  
- Modular architecture: UI components + mock API layer.

---

## Tech Stack

| Layer | Tech | Purpose |
|-------|------|----------|
| Frontend | [React 18](https://react.dev/) + [Vite](https://vitejs.dev/) | Fast SPA UI |
| Styling | Plain CSS | Lightweight styling |
| Mock Data | LocalStorage | Stand-in for real DB |
| Simulation | `setInterval()` + state updates | Mimics backend feed |

---

## Installation

### 1. Clone the repo
```bash
git clone https://github.com/Park-EZ/parkez.git
cd parkez
```

### 2. Create or activate your Node environment

If you’re using **Conda (no sudo)**:
```bash
conda create -n parkez nodejs=20 -c conda-forge -y
conda activate parkez
```

Or plain Node:
```bash
# Check if node/npm exist
node -v && npm -v
# If not, install Node LTS (v20+)
```
### 3. Install Local MongoDB (recommended method)
```bash
Install MongoDB if not already on machine at https://www.mongodb.com/try/download/community
Ensure that MongoDB Compass is installed -- Launch it
Create a new connection at mongodb://localhost:27017
```

### 4. Install dependencies
```bash
npm install
(also for good measure)
cd server
npm install
cd ..
```

### 5. Copy .env.example as .env
```bash
Copy .env.example into root project directory (/parkez/) as .env
```
---

## 6. Run the app (Development)

Start the Vite dev server:
```bash
npm run dev
```

If you’re running on a **remote Linux server**, make it visible to your network:
```bash
npx vite --host 0.0.0.0 --port 5173
```
## 7. Import starting mock data

There are 3 .json files in \parkez\mockData which we will import using MongoDB Compass
In Compass, select the connection we made earlier and navigate into ezpark
Here select Deck, click 'Add Data', and Import JSON or CSV file. Then select the corresponding .json file from the mockData folder
Please do the same for levels and spots

(If this is confusing [which it might be], please refer to the User Manual where we explain the startup process in more detail with supporting screenshots.)

## 6. Restart the app (Development)

Start the Vite dev server:
```bash
Ctrl + C
npm run dev
```

Then open:
```
http://YOUR_SERVER_IP:5173/
```

You’ll see the **Park-EZ** dashboard with decks, levels, and spots.

---

## Build for Production

Generate an optimized build:
```bash
npm run build
```

This creates static files in the `dist/` directory.

You can serve them with any static web server, e.g.:
```bash
python -m http.server 8080 --directory dist
```

Then visit:
```
http://YOUR_SERVER_IP:8080/
```

---

## Project Structure

```
parkez/
├─ src/
│  ├─ components/        # Reusable UI pieces
│  │   ├─ Header.jsx
│  │   ├─ DeckList.jsx
│  │   ├─ LevelView.jsx
│  │   └─ SpotGrid.jsx
│  ├─ api.js             # Mock backend logic (CRUD + live simulation)
│  ├─ mockData.js        # Seed data for decks, levels, spots
│  ├─ App.jsx            # Root component
│  ├─ main.jsx           # Vite entry point
│  └─ styles.css         # Base styling
├─ index.html
├─ package.json
├─ vite.config.js
└─ README.md
```

---

## Scripts

| Command | Description |
|----------|--------------|
| `npm run dev` | Start local dev server |
| `npm run build` | Build production bundle |
| `npm run preview` | Preview production build |
| `npm install` | Install dependencies |

---

## Environment & Deployment Notes

- Works entirely client-side (no backend needed).  
- Data is stored in `localStorage`, every browser session is persistent.  
- The `api.js` layer can be swapped out for real API calls to a **Fastify** backend or a REST service.  
- To deploy, simply upload the `/dist` folder to any static host (GitHub Pages, Netlify, S3, etc).

---

## Future Enhancements

-  Replace mock data with real IoT sensor or camera feeds.  
-  Add authentication for staff/student roles.  
-  Integrate real QR code scanning using `getUserMedia` + `jsQR`.  
-  Add backend with **Fastify + MongoDB** for real sessions & analytics.  
-  Show deck-level congestion and estimated time to find parking.
- 
---

## License
This project is open-source for educational use.  
Feel free to fork, adapt, and extend with attribution.

---
